Now we're going to put to work the main
equation of quantum mechanics,
the Schrodinger equation, and
use it solve a very interesting problem.
It will also illustrate why quantum
mechanic effects are not important in our
everyday lives, while being essential when
we're dealing with atomic length scales.
The question we're going to
ask is what happens if we
enforce a particle-like solution
in our quantum mechanical problem.
So basically, what it means is that
we postulate, let's postulate,
that t equals zero.
At the initial moment
of time t equal zero,
we have the wave function such as this,
which is called Gaussian wave packet.
And this wave function basically describes
a particle which is localized
in space around zero.
So it's a typical Gaussian, around zero.
And the spread out of this Gaussian is of
order d, which is the parameter of the.
So A here is some coefficient.
It's not very important at this stage.
Now the calculation which we're going to
present is essentially the evolution
of this initial condition with time under
the action of the Schroedinger equation,
and it's a big technical question.
So for those of you who are not
interested in technical details,
I would like just to
present the final answer so
that you can understand the bottom line
without going into technicalities.
And so the final answer is here.
So here, we have the wave
function as a function of time,
models of it squared, so
we describe essentially particles.
And, as we will see, this side
squared has the same Gaussian form
as the regional wave function, but the
difference here is that the parameter d,
which describes its spreading,
it increases with time.
And it increases with time as one
plus t squared over some tau squared,
where tau squared is this typical time
scale at which the spreading occurs.
So if we now look at this dependence
of [INAUDIBLE] squared on x,
and as time goes by we will see a more and
more uniform density.
So eventually it will be almost flat.
Now, this basically implies
that a particle like solution,
this type of wave [INAUDIBLE],
is unstable in quantum mechanics.
So but the important thing is
the time scale itself at which
this spreading occurs.
And let us estimate this time scale for
two sort of diametrically opposite cases.
So one case will be
the case of an electron,
a microscopic elementary particle,
with a mass of about 10 to -27 grams.
And let's assume that it's localized
on atomic length scales
of 10 to -8 centimeters.
So if we plug in the numbers,
what we're going to see is the typical
time scale at which the spreading,
he localization radius if you want, of
this electron doubles is on the order of
10 minus 16 seconds,
which is an extremely short time scheme.
Hardly observable in any experiment.
Now if we take, on the contrary,
a macroscopic object, let's say a typical
human being, which is also described
by the laws of quantum mechanics.
So the difference will
be quite noticeable.
So here, well the mass of course of
macroscopic object here will be around
let's say 50 kilograms, and
let's say we want to be localized on
a distance of under 1 centimeter.
Well if we now plug in the numbers into
this equation, what we're going to see is
that the typical time scale of which
sort of quantum delocalization
of a human being occurs is
a quarter 10 to plus 30 seconds.
So to put this number in perspective,
so this is equal to 10 to the 23 years,
or 10 to the 13 10 trillion
lifetimes of the universe.
So basically it's a, in some sense,
meaningless number, so it's a number which
is never relevant in any realistic
circumstances, so we shouldn't be worrying
too much about being quantum delocalized
due to quantum mechanical effect.
And if you now look at
different time scales for
various objects that we are dealing
with our everyday lives,
we're going to see that essentially for
all those objects, even the smallest ones,
we can safely say that quantum mechanical
effects are completely irrelevant.
At the moment we're going to
go to fundamental microscopic
time scales, and
it's going to change very significantly.
Now, I'm going to actually derive
the main result that I presented in
the previous slide,
the evolution of the Gaussian wave packet.
And as I mentioned to you this derivation
is a bit on the technical side.
So those of you who are not really
interested in these technicalities
may just skip towards
the end of the lecture.
But those who want to actually learn
the technical part of quantum mechanics,
which is the main part of quantum
mechanics, should pay attention,
perhaps rederive it on your own.
Now the main element of the solution
is the decomposition of the initial
condition of this wave-packet
into the plane-waves.
So plane-waves are presented here.
So sort of as a modulation as to why
we want to do something like this,
we should recall that
the Schrodinger equation was used or
derived, almost by construction,
to describe waves rather than particles.
In this initial conditions we have chosen
is, in some sense, an arbitrary function.
There's absolutely no reason why it would
be a convenient solution to anything.
While the plane-waves are indeed
the solutions, and so
by decomposing this function, or
any initial condition for this match up,
these plane waves we actually simplify
things a lot, as we'll see later.
Form the medical point of view,
this composition is nothing but
a Fourier transform of this wave
function into the functions.
So these cosines and sines.
And we know very well how to do this
decomposition, but before we go to this,
I would like to remind you of the
following identity for Gaussian integral,
which actually we're going to use at
least three times in this derivation,
in different topics.
So if we have an exponential
of the quadratic function,
with some alpha and beta here, so
the integral from minus infinity to
positive infinity is well known and
it's given by this equation.
So we're going to just use it later on.
Now the reason it's relevant at
this stage of the derivation
is because the Fourier transform,
or in other words these Fourier
harmonics which in the context of quantum
mechanics are called wave function in
the momentum space, are determined exactly
by this type of Gaussian integral.
Because what we have to do in order to
ensure this five p, we have to take
the integral of this exponential,
either bar minus x squared or
two d squared with this integral
minus i over h bar p x.
And if we look at this integral and
compare it with this Gaussian expression,
we will see that alpha here is
equal to one over two d squared.
And beta is equal to minus i h bar p.
So if we use now this formula, so
beta squared is equal to minus
p squared over h squared, and
divided by four alpha will give
us the following expression.
So if I completely ignore
the overall coefficient,
it's not really important for
the following.
So now, let me just erase this and
get rid of this Gaussian integral, so
now we're going to interpret actually this
Fourier transform in an interesting way.
So, the reason we have constructed
this initial condition
in this form was because we
wanted to localize our particle.
Sort of from a certain length scale of.
So the uncertainty of our initial
condition in real space is.
But by looking at this sort of wave
function and the momentum space,
we see that the uncertainty in momentum
delta b, A is a quarter h bar over d.
So it's inverse proportional to
the utilization in real space.
And so this sort of dual relation, so
the more it's localized in real space
the less it's localized in the momentum
space and vice versa, is a particular
manifestation of what is known as a
general Heisenberg uncertainty principle.
Which is written here, so that in general,
whatever wave function you have,
whatever quantum state you possible can
construct, there's always a constraint
that the uncertainty of position times
the uncertainty in momentum is larger or
equal than h bar,
h bar being the plane onstant.
So now we're in the position to solve
the main technical problem that we
formulated in the beginning
of this segment.
That is,
to solve the Schrodinger equation,
the free Schrodinger equation here.
So Hamiltonian here is
just p squared over two m,
with the initial condition written as so.
So instead of writing it as
a Gaussian in real space,
we' write it as a linear
combination of plain waves,
that was basically the Fourier
transform in the previous slide.
Now, in order to ride the tangent
tandem of wave function,
we need to take into account
two simple circumstances.
The first circumstance is the fact
the Schrodinger equation,
the time Schrodinger equation,
is a linear equation.
Which implies that if we have
several solutions to this equation,
say one, say two, say three,
etc, their sum is also solution,
with initial condition being simply the
sum of the first 20 initial conditions.
Now the second circumstance is
we have to recall that a plane
wave are written as so is indeed
a solution of the Schroedinger equation.
In some sense,
we can construct a Schroedinger equation.
That it would give us
this guide as a solution.
And here the epsilon of p
the energy of the electron,
the energy of free electron and
simply equal to p squared over two m.
Now if we take a look at
the initial condition again,
written in this form,
we see that it's an integral over.
But integral is a sum in some sense.
It just happens to be an infinite sum.
So we can use the fact that a Schrodinger
equation's a linear equation and
write psi of x and t,
the full solution, as so.
So basically all we have to do is
replace this plane wave at t equals zero
with the plane wave at a finite time with
epsilon of p being p squared over two m.
And so to write now the wave
function a more convenient way, so
what remains now is to calculate
the Gaussian integral over momentum.
And it can be done again using
the same identity that we used in
the previous slide, but now the parameter
alpha here is going to be d squared
over two h squared plus i
t divided by two m h bar,
and the parameter beta
now is i x over h bar.
So again,
if we use the same identity what we get is
the following expression for
the wave function.
We see that this expression is
an intrinsically complex function,
but if we're interested just in
determining the density of our particle,
so where the particle is located,
so the only thing which matters,
as I mentioned already and we'll discuss
it in more details a little later,
is the absolute value of
the wave function squared.
So, this absolute value
squared can be calculated,
again, we don't worry too much
about the overall coefficients.
We only look at what
appears in the exponential.
So we can write this density as
an exponential basically from here,
minus x squared over t squared
where there is also another term,
which is one over one plus t squared or
tau squared.
And tau here is exactly the timescale
we discussed in the beginning, which
is mass times the delocalization length in
some sense, d squared divided by h bar.
So this completes the derivation of the
main result that we discussed earlier and
also completes the first lecture.
Thank you very much.
And I will see you in
class later in the week.